have you ever seen in the news or the
newspaper a Nobel Prize announcement for
a discovery that was made like years or
even decades ago and wondered why did
they wait so long to award them the
prize
well the 2019 Nobel Prize in Physics was
part shared by didier queloz and Michael
Mayo for the discovery of the very first
exoplanet so a planet not in our solar
system but around another star in our
galaxy the Milky Way a discovery that
was made over 20 years ago the thing is
it's sometimes not just the discovery
itself that's worthy of the prize but
the legacy that that discovery leaves
so to understand why the Nobel Prize was
awarded to Mayo and qualit we have to go
back I mean way back all the way to the
15th century and the Italian philosopher
poet Breyer theorists geared on Oh Bruno
he was one of the first very vocal
supporters of Copernicus's heliocentrism
model this is when Copernicus placed the
Sun and not the earth as the center of
what was then the entire universe and in
1584 Bruno made the leap to say well if
the Sun is the center of our solar
system then perhaps all the other stars
in the sky are just like the Sun and so
therefore also have planets around them
as well in his musings he also insisted
that the universe was Infinite and had
no center either so this guy was way
ahead of his time so far ahead that the
Catholic Church at the time decreed
everything he said is heresy and burned
him at the stake for his beliefs fast
forward now to the 18th century and the
publication of Isaac Newton's Principia
in 1713 one of the most famous
scientific works ever in the conclusion
of which Newton comparing stars in the
sky to the Sun he said if true fixed
stars were centers of similar systems
they will all be constructed according
to similar design aka
the stars in the sky should also have
planets in them and for Newton to echo
that same belief it really fixed in
people's minds that the Sun wasn't alone
in the universe
having planets around them of course you
have to then proof that that is the case
and so everybody wanted to be the first
person to detect an extrasolar planet
and as telescopes got better towards the
end of the 19th century one of the first
claims are be a false claim over
exoplanet detection came through when
williams stevens jacob as early as 1855
announced that he'd discovered a planet
around the binary star
seventy offer Yuki what you've been
doing was observing the positions of the
stars in this binary system as they
orbited around each other and he said
that positions couldn't be explained if
they were the only two bodies in the
system there had to be some unseen body
a.k.a planet that was there disturbing
their orbits and giving them these weird
positions but that was disproven in 1899
by Forrester a Moulton who pointed out
that if you actually did the mathematics
such a planet would have a completely
unstable orbit and couldn't possibly
exist the field of exoplanets though had
to wait until 1952 for another big leap
forward that came from auto strew a
russian-born American astronomer who
really was with the most high-profile
astronomers of the 20th century and he
turned this search for exoplanets from
sort of a sci-fi type of thing to really
something that was more realistic he
published a paper that said okay if we
are seriously going to search for
planets outside our solar system
then we have to come up with scientific
methods for doing so and well here's two
we could try and the first one he
suggested was that we study the
brightness of stars and we see if the
brightness dips periodically if the
brightness dips then you can say well
perhaps a planet has actually passed in
front of that star and we've recorded
every 10 days or every 10 years perhaps
and if we see that same brightness
dipping occur on that exact same
repeatable timescale then we can be sure
that what that we're seeing there is a
planet orbiting its star the other
method that he suggested would also work
was looking for changes in a star's
radial velocity so if you imagine a
planet orbiting a star you sort of tend
to imagine the star being in a fixed
position and the planet orbiting around
the very center of the system which is
in the very center of the star the thing
is that's not quite true
if you imagine starting with two objects
that are in the same mass and they're
orbiting each other then they'll orbit
the very center of mass between them
which will be halfway between them and
they'll orbit like a binary star system
does if you make one mass then much
smaller then that center of mass will
shift towards the larger object
and if you keep making one of them
smaller and smaller eventually that
center of mass will shift so that it's
inside one of the objects and that's
what happens when a planets going around
a star the center of mass is inside the
star but it's not exactly in the center
and so the star itself is orbiting
around a point in its middle and so what
that appears to us is like the Stars
kind of wobbling on the sky and we can
detect that wobble in the light that the
star is giving out because at some
points the star will be wobbling towards
us and at some point it will be wobbling
away from us and just like with a
Doppler shift with sound when an
ambulance you know come screaming
pasta's when it's coming towards us the
pitch of the ambulance gets much higher
and when it's moving away from us the
pitch of the ambulance gets much lower
that's because the wave is being
literally squashed and stretched by the
ambulance moving towards and away from
us the same thing happens to the light
of the star that it's giving off and so
we call that a redshift when it's moving
away from us and a blueshift when it's
coming towards us and by detecting that
we can detect how fast the star is
actually moving around that little
Center and then you can determine how
big the planet is orbiting around it by
how much it shifted that Center by the
problem was that in the 1950s the
technology was nowhere near good enough
to actually detect those shifts the
instruments they were using were giving
measurement errors of over a thousand
meters per second in a velocity change
whereas if you compare that to the
velocity change that Jupiter gives to
the Sun it's 12 meters per second and
earth is something like point one meters
per second so they were nowhere near the
level they needed in order to actually
detect exoplanets at the time when auto
Struve suggested this method but that
paper did make the prospect of detecting
exoplanets much more scientifically
realistic and it did kept people
thinking so much so that Hawaii in 1959
published a really famous paper where he
introduced the idea of a habitable zone
around a star the region around a star
where the temperature on a planet would
be between zero and a hundred degrees
centigrade ie the
freezing and boiling point of water it
would be the region where you would find
liquid water know that it doesn't mean
that it's habitable to humans because
well Mars is in the sun's habitable zone
but it doesn't have an atmosphere that
can support human life it's lost it all
to the solar wind and so obviously
that's not habitable but it is a good
way of at least characterizing it the
ideas of the 50s and presumably the
space race in the 60s as well really
spurred people on in this search for
exoplanets so much so that there was a
huge flurry of false alarms again one of
the most high-profile of them by Pieter
van de Kamp
in 1963 who claimed he discovered a
planet around Barnard star which is one
of the closest stars to the Sun he
claimed he detected the star wobbling in
its orbit but not using the redshift
like auto storybird suggested but
actually by studying the position of the
star on the sky his paper suggested that
from the changing positions of Bernards
star that he'd measured that there was a
1.6 times the mass of Jupiter planet
they're orbiting at about four point
four times the distance of the Earth and
the Sun he then refined that estimate in
1969 to say actually I think there's two
planets one that's 1.1 times the mass of
Jupiter and one that's naught point 8
times the mass of Jupiter the problem
was that many astronomers could not
reproduce his observations at all not
for want of trying but they couldn't
find these changes in positions that
he'd claimed and it actually took until
1974 when swathmore showed that the
changes in the positions that van de
Kamp had actually recorded correlated
with the times when the telescope that
he'd used had maintenance on it or was
recalibrated and so the changes in the
positions in the star that he recorded
were actually just a change in the
position in the telescope that's how
accurate these kind of observations need
to be if you don't account for the fact
that your telescope has changed ever so
slightly on its mount then you're gonna
incorrectly assume that there's a planet
around a star when there's not but the
1980s telescopes had improved leaps and
bounds so much so that Bradford Smith
and Richard teal actually managed to
image material
all around the star beta Pictoris what
that image was sort of a a dusty disc
surrounding the star which from
planetary formation models was expected
if you were forming brand new planets
around that star it was the first time
any material around the star had been
detected in visible light and it really
spurred people on again to actually try
and find the first fully formed planet
around a star as we head into the 1990s
the first thing I want to mention is
that the Hubble Space Telescope was
launched in April 1990 a mere months
before I came into the world after a few
minor teething problems with its mirror
it became a telescope that was
instrumental in the study of exoplanets
then in 1992 the first discovery of a
planet finally came but in the most
unexpected of places
it wasn't round a star like the Sun it
was around a pulsar this is something
that's formed at the end of a star's
life a massive star that's gone
supernova and left over this remnant of
a neutron star that's spinning and
giving off radio waves so much so that
we detect them as pulses of radio waves
on earth that you can literally set your
watch to they are incredibly precise and
it was alexander wall Kazan at del
fraile that showed that the arrival of
the pulses from pulsar 1257 +12 were off
ever Society and that could only be
explained by the presence of two planets
orbiting that pulsar that as they
orbited it they would actually delay the
radio pulses arriving to us on earth
even in follow-up observations and
released another paper in 1994 to say
actually the two planet model wasn't
quite right and we actually need three
planets to describe this system I cannot
stress enough how much of a surprise
this discovery was to the Astronomy
community nobody expected
everyone literally had to rethink that
entire view of how planets formed you
know the originally people thought that
they formed as a star formed from the
leftovers of whatever didn't form the
star but define three planets that were
only slightly bigger than the Earth
orbiting around a pulsar that would mean
either the planets had to fully survive
the supernova that formed the Pulsar in
the first place so perhaps they were big
gas giants like Jupiter that had all of
that gas stripped just leaving the core
around the pulsar or perhaps you've had
like a secondary stage of planet
formation where the supernovas happened
destroyed everything around it but then
left all this debris where you've had
this second round of planet formation
around the Pulsar so it wasn't
necessarily the result that people
wanted but it definitely gave people a
lot to think about
it was then finally in October of 1995
that michel mayor and didier queloz
discovered the first EXO planet around a
normal star in fact it was a star that
was just like the Sun to do that didya
in May or studied a hundred and forty
two different styles for over a year
watching for those little blue and red
shifts that would suggest that there's a
planet going round it and finally found
this one 51 pegasi B but it was a planet
that was 2 times the mass of Jupiter and
it orbited only 5% of the distance
between the Earth and the Sun that would
be inside the orbit of mercury in our
own solar system once again though the
Astronomy community was absolutely
stumped by this result it was a Jupiter
inside the orbit of mercury no one had
ever considered that before because all
planetary formation models have been
based on well the one example we had to
go off which was the solar system where
we find rocky planets in towards the Sun
and the big gas giant things up to the
size of Jupiter way out on the
skirts people then started to consider
the idea of planetary migration where
you could form something like Jupiter
from the Isis and the gas that were
found well out from a star and then it
could actually migrate and move inwards
so that its orbit was ever smaller and
smaller even now we actually think that
that was supposed to happen in our solar
system but you think we've sort of held
back from doing that by the presence of
Saturn so we should all be very thankful
for Saturn it's why it's my favorite
planet but after this momentous
discovery by didier and Mail the
floodgates really did open on the field
of exoplanets in particular Butler Marcy
Williams houses and shirts found a
planet around epsilon Andromeda in 1997
and then in 1999 with the help of a
couple of other colleagues including
Fisher Kongos kaznyk Nissen Santino's
realized that the observations of these
little blue and red shifts of the star
on Andromeda this radial velocity
measurement didn't match a one planet
model they needed three planets in orbit
around that star to be able to explain
what they were seeing this was the first
multi exoplanet system found and it
showed that the solar system wasn't
unique in the universe at all into the
2000s which was really a decade of
firsts and in particular the very first
planet that was detected using the
transit method now it already been found
using the radial velocity method where
you look for those blue and red shifts
of the star but that meant that people
knew when to look for the transit and so
two groups did that independently and
published at the same time and announced
that they had observed transits of HD 2
0 9 4 5 8 meaning that the planet around
it was HD 2 0 9 4 5 8 be the observant
among you will notice that you're gonna
see that planet popping up a lot in the
next couple of results so just to make
it clear how many firsts that this
planet is involved with I'm going to
nickname it Heidi
HD Heidi before we get to Heidi though
in 2001 newest Santos and collaborators
found the very first planet in the
habitable zone around a star it's five
point seven times the mass of Jupiter so
it's not exactly earth-like under any
definition but it is still in the
habitable zone which was a major
advancement for the field of exoplanets
and now the golden age of our friend
Heidi HD 2 0 9 4 5 8 B in 2002
Charbonneau and collaborators managed to
detect sodium in the atmosphere of Heidi
ie in the light that had passed from the
star and through the atmosphere on its
way to earth and it became the first
exoplanet ever to have its atmosphere
characterized in some way or form in
2005 Deming and collaborators then
managed to isolate the light from Heidi
and it became the first exoplanet ever
to have radiations specifically from the
exoplanet detected in 2007 two
independent groups one led by Richardson
and one led by grill mare then managed
to isolate the light from Heidi split it
through a prism and produced the very
first spectrum of the atmosphere of an
exoplanet and once those two groups had
shown that was possible speculation run
right through the community of what we
do with that method would we be able to
detect water oxygen ozone carbon dioxide
the markers of life on a planet using
that method an excitement which was only
fueled further later in 2007 by barman
who then managed to take a spectra of
Heidi's light and actually say I've
detected absorption by water vapor in
the atmosphere ie the light on the way
from the star through the planet's
atmosphere was absorbed by water a very
very specific wavelength that we've seen
here on earth in the lab as well and
they managed to detect that dip at that
wavelength and so Heidi became the first
exoplanet to have water vapor
in its atmosphere okay so Heidi hysteria
aside in 2009 despite all of these
detection of exoplanets we finally had
the first image of direct image of an
exoplanet around another star this was a
group effort led by Paul Callas and it
was at the planet forum halt be upon it
a hundred and nineteen times further out
than the earth is from the Sun there is
three times the mass of Jupiter and
detect it they needed the Hubble Space
Telescope to do that and what they did
was they put a mask on the detector to
block out all of the light from the
central star and they took an image in
2004 and noticed oh that little bright
spot there and maybe that's the planet
took another image in 2006 and saw that
that bright spot had moved on its orbit
around the star bomb holes this image is
one of the most famous scientific images
of the 21st century it is momentous in
its achievement the fact they've been
able to TechEd something that is so
faint it doesn't give out light of its
own it's only reflecting its star's
light next to this blindingly bright
star is incredible and the Hubble Space
Telescope has gone back to that star and
done the exact same thing and found it's
moved even further around its orbit
since we last observed it in the end of
the decade in 2009 so the launch of the
Kepler space telescope a mission that
would go on to detect 2662 exoplanets in
its nine and a half years of service to
detect those planets the Kepler space
telescope stared at the same patch of
sky for that entire time in the
constellation of Cygnus and it was
basically recording constantly the
brightness of those stars looking for
those dips where there would be a
transit of the planet in front of its
star it was a phenomenal group effort by
NASA and ISA that allowed that mission
to happen and it's legacy will continue
to live on in the decades to come
14 then saw the detection of an
earth-sized planet in a habitable zone
by eliza Quinn tano and collaborators
kepler-186f is 10 percent bigger than
Earth and is the outermost of a 5 planet
system all of which in the habitable
zone around their star and that was the
most earth-like planet that we knew up
until 2015 when the mantle was stolen
when John Jenkins and collaborators
discovered
kepler-452b this is a planet that's just
over 50% bigger than the earth but it's
orbiting a star exactly like the Sun
every 384 days and that puts it well
within it star's habitable zone and so
all of those properties the fact that it
is so similar to earth have earned it
the title of earth 2.0 then in 2016 and
GLaDOS CUDA and collaborators discovered
the closest exoplanet to Earth in
Proxima be this was a planet orbiting
Proxima Centauri aka one of the closest
stars to Earth in the Alpha Centauri
triple star system not only that this
planet is about 30% bigger than the
earth but it orbits a lot closer to its
star so much that its orbit only takes
it 11 days so you would think that it
would be scorching hot however its star
is only a red dwarf star it's a very
small much cooler than the Sun star and
so this planet is actually in the
habitable zone as well so not only do we
have the closest exoplanet to earth but
the closest exit planet in the habitable
zone as well then in 2017 the record for
the number of exoplanets in a single
system was broken twice in quick
succession
first of all Gillan and his
collaborators announced that they had
found a seven planet system around the
star Trappist one all of which were
rocky planets and in the habitable zone
around this dwarf star again
then later in the year Shalu and
Vanderburgh announced the discovery of
an eighth planet around Kepler 90 Kepler
90 I this made it as big as the solar
system and the biggest exoplanet system
known but it was also a landmark
discovery because the planet Kepler 90 I
was discovered in the data using machine
learning it was an algorithm that had
been developed by the team at Google
brain so not only like the biggest
exoplanet system known but also the
first planet that was discovered by
machine learning then earlier this year
in June 2019 the number of known
exoplanets
went over four thousand for the first
time then in September two separate
groups one led by T's eros and one by
Beneke announced the first detection of
water vapor in an exoplanets atmosphere
that was in the habitable zone around
its star so because this planet was in
the habitable zone it was much more
likely that this water would be liquid
rather than vapour form this planet was
k2 18b and it was very much a mini
Neptune it wasn't earth-like at all it
was a big gas giant its atmosphere was
mostly hydrogen but it was still the
first planet detected with water in its
atmosphere in a habitable zone as well
the obvious next step to me is detecting
water in the atmosphere of an earth-like
planet in a habitable zone you know
water in the atmosphere of an earth 2.0
where you can imagine perhaps also it
would have liquid water oceans that'll
probably comment with the launch of the
test mission in 2018 this is the
follow-up to the Kepler space telescope
which is already facilitated the
discovery of hundreds of exoplanets and
with the launch of the James Webb Space
Telescope which is the follow-up to the
Hubble Space Telescope which will allow
us to get much more accurate and precise
spectra of these exoplanets in the
infrared where this water absorption
takes place all of these discoveries
emissions though are just the
of the iceberg in this field that was
fully made possible by that first
discovery in 1995 by koalas and mayo I
might have mentioned 50 or so results in
this video whereas in reality the number
of scientific papers in this field must
be in the tens of thousands
it's that legacy combined with our new
understanding of the fatten the solar
system and earth are not unique in our
universe
the prompted the Nobel Prize Committee
to award the Nobel Prize in Physics for
2019 to quell ups a may or even 24 years
after that first world and life-changing
discovery I didn't even mention planet
hunters what am i doing oh my god that's
been running for years planet hunters
it's a website that lets you search for
exoplanets in the data so all of the
data from the New Testament will go
online and you'll need to search through
it to try and find the stuff that
computers and algorithms miss because
you can only teach an algorithm to
search for something that you know what
about the stuff that we don't know what
it looks like so I'll put the link in
the description below if you want to
take part in that because it's a really
cool project and wondered one is that
they wait so long to award them the
prize I wait wait don't pay it no it's
brilliant tree and the publication of
Isaac Newton's Principia in 1754 so 1713
good guess not right they needed three
planets around Upsilon and drama to it
and drama 2 in 2007 two independent
groups one them by Richardson and then
one led by grill mah grill Mayer grill
Mayer grill Mayer guerrilla more grill
Mayer grill my hair grill meh video
killed the radio star
you'll kill the radiostar in my mind and
my car country wine we've got too many
exoplanets Ron Harry and Hermione I'm
very happy about one of these exoplanets
discoveries aren't you guys talking to
inanimate people I'm a t-shirt now
you